---
layout: post
title: "Progress porting wasmtime-runtime to Theseus"
author: Kevin Boos <https://github.com/kevinaboos>
release: false
---


## Porting `wasmtime-runtime`, the key `wasmtime` crate
A [previous post from late 2021](../../../2021/12/31/November-December-Update-WASM.html) chronicled our ongoing journey to port `wasmtime` to Theseus. 
While our bottom-up approach got off to a strong start, we quickly encountered our first major challenge when examining the `wasmtime-runtime` crate, as it contains many dependencies on platform-specific and legacy system interfaces:
* Unix-like memory mapping and protection
* Signal/trap handling 
* Thread-local storage
* Stack introspection and backtracing
* File and I/O abstractions 
* Exception (panic) handling and unwinding resumption 

This post describes our progress over a few weeks of working to add these features to Theseus in order to support `wasmtime-runtime`'s many complex dependencies.


### Porting & reorganizing third-party libraries
We first re-organized Theseus's repository to include two folders for third-party crates:
* `libs/`: contains standalone crates that don't depend on Theseus, but can be used by Theseus and others.
* `ports/`: contains crates that have been ported to depend directly on Theseus-specific crates, e.g., those in `kernel/` and are thus not standalone.

The main features ported over the past couple of months (early winter 2021-2022) are shown in the table below:

| Crate / Feature | Summary | Reason Needed for `wasmtime-runtime` |
|-----------------|---------|---------------|
| `libc`     | Rust wrapper around the actual platform-specific `libc` implementation    | Used to establish memory mappings and register signal handlers |
| `region`   | Cross-platform APIs for virtual memory functions  | Used to allocate large chunks of memory and remap/protect memory regions as exec/read/write as needed |
| TLS        | Thread-Local Storage areas | Used for `thread_local!()` macro, which is needed to handle traps and stack unwinding upon exceptions that occur while executing native code that was JIT-compiled from a WASM binary |
| `object`   | Helper crate for reading/writing object files, e.g., ELF | Used to read object files generated by `cranelift`'s backend and to manage unwind info |


#### Porting `libc` to Theseus
Support for a minimal subset of `libc` functionality has been an ongoing but low-priority effort, mostly for two reasons:
1. Running C code directly on Theseus is inherently unsafe, as C is not a safe language and can thus violate Theseus's language safety-based isolation and resource usage guarantees.
2. No crates that Theseus depends on have needed an underlying `libc`, thus Theseus as a platform did not need to offer one... until now.

Theseus's libc implementation is called `tlibc`. which is described in [this book chapter](https://www.theseus-os.com/Theseus/book/c/programs.html).
So far it has been loosely based on the Redox project's `relibc`.

Our efforts of late were focused on supporting `mmap` for POSIX-style memory mappings, which Theseus has traditionally eschewed because they are unsafe and poorly-designed from a state management perspective[^1].
In the future, we also may support POSIX-style signal handlers, but for now we have chosen to re-implement `wasmtime`'s signal handling directly in safe Rust atop Theseus rather than going through an unsafe `libc` FFI boundary for no good reason.

The bulk of the `mmap` implemenation for `tlibc` was added in [commit fffda85](https://github.com/theseus-os/Theseus/commit/fffda853e71b5a0d7b20b850297962227e592850).
The key aspects of this are:
* `tlibc` exposes a POSIX-style `mmap()` function that calls Theseus APIs to instantiate new `MappedPages` objects, and then saves them in a private list so that they aren't dropped until the corresponding `munmap()` call is invoked.
  * This is required because Theseus's abstraction of a virtual memory mapping, `MappedPages`, is auto-unmapped upon `drop` to guarantee safety.
* Currently, `mlock` and `munlock` are dummy functions because Theseus doesn't perform any swapping or paging to disk. 
* Memory protection (`mprotect`) is offered, but is currently limited because Theseus forces all current memory mappings to be marked as "present" in the page table. 
  * Thus, stripping read permissions from a mapping technically works, but it violates the guarantees of the `MappedPages` type, i.e., the mapping is present and valid for the entire lifetime of a `MappedPages` object.

While we were at it, we went even further with additional improvements to `theseus_cargo`, `libc`, and `tlibc` to [facilitate integration of Rust and C code](https://github.com/theseus-os/Theseus/commit/870fb246af68d02be7981374687b80c1429f48eb) atop Theseus. 
* Each time we implement a new feature in `tlibc`, we must also update 
[Here's an example of that for `mmap`](https://github.com/theseus-os/Theseus/commit/d0fbcd0e11d56183bb306d43430dc65d4d640869), with some testing functions included.
* `theseus_cargo` now supports building out-of-tree components [that depend on both Rust and C code](https://github.com/theseus-os/Theseus/commit/a685e062848d3b1522b2b962c21f51facb25726e), e.g., native libraries. 
  * It also now supports building `rlib` and `staticlib` crate types.
* We added [basic `stdio` features to `tlibc`](https://github.com/theseus-os/Theseus/commit/4b83e95cf128a0ecd67a6c5de39f18f8bb317048), e.g., for `printf`, which is useful for testing purposes.

> In summary, we fixed all the issues with `tlibc`, `libc`, and `theseus_cargo`.
>
> Now, Rust and C code (both in-tree and out-of-tree components) can all be compiled and loaded/linked together in Theseus.



[^1]: See our [OSDI 2020 paper](https://www.theseus-os.com/Theseus/book/misc/papers_presentations.html) for an in-depth discussion of this.


#### Porting `region` to Theseus
With `tlibc` now supporting basic `libc` memory mapping functions, porting the `region` crate was fairly straightforward. 


However, importantly, we chose to *not* force `region` on Theseus to depend on `tlibc`, mainly because it would introduce another layer of unsafety.
The [primary implementation of `alloc` and `free` are here](https://github.com/theseus-os/region-rs/commit/b4de9a22b5c3c8a1e2b9f2834fe33df27472891e#diff-761c91258f20f42f7145ee39c2cbac444849c5a5285f5d9695a3aeea4d27c6d5), which are similar to the `mmap()` implemenation in `tlibc`.
We also must express the [`region::Protection`](https://docs.rs/region/3.0.0/region/struct.Protection.html) type in terms of Theseus's page table `EntryFlags`, which was generally straightforward.


The one tricky part of `region` that we disliked is [`QueryIter`](https://docs.rs/region/3.0.0/region/struct.QueryIter.html), which allows the caller to query *all* virtual memory areas across the entire current virtual address space to find ones that span or overlap with a certain range of addresses.  
This is problematic for a few reasons:
* Theseus's state management philosophy dictates that it does not maintain a centralized list of all memory mappings, so there's nothing to iterate over by default.
* Theseus provides a very safe and clear API for interacting with memory mappings, which [`region::query_range()`](https://docs.rs/region/3.0.0/region/fn.query_range.html) completely ignores because it assumes a POSIX-style virtual memory API.
* Theseus strives to prevent [TOCTTOU attacks](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Time-of-check_to_time-of-use) by avoiding the concept of a [handles that point to a resource indirectly](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Handle_(computing)). By design (and by necessity atop conventional OSes), `QueryIter` separates the "time of check" from the "time of use", leading to potentially confusing behavior and errors in which a memory region returned from a query no longer exists by the time one attempts to use it.

In the end, our solution was to allow `QueryIter` to expose and return **only references to the memory areas already created by the `region` crate itself**. This strives to mitigate safety issues that could arise by exposing *all* memory regions maintained by Theseus to higher-level Rust code that may use them unsafely through the `region` APIs.
Hopefully this feature restriction doesn't pose a problem in the future.


### Supporting Thread-Local Storage on Theseus
[Thread-Local Storage (TLS)](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Thread-local_storage) allows one to declare a variable that will be instantiated on a per-thread basis, with each thread having its own local copy that other threads cannot access.
This is useful for many reasons, e.g., programming conveniencce, performant access to thread-specific data without locking, etc.
Our motivation for finally supporting it in its ultimate flexible form -- the ELF standard TLS areas -- stemmed from `wasmtime-runtime`, which uses it in myriad ways.

> Note: previously, Theseus offered a cheap imitation of TLS using the GS register to store limited, targeted data about each task, but it wasn't usable by any applications, libraries, or even other non-`task` kernel crates.

We implemented TLS support [across several commits](https://github.com/theseus-os/Theseus/commit/3e6c50a0a45560057c6a35db4ce220760e362962).
This was a suprisingly complex and tricky implementation that required a lot of trial-and-error experimentation to determine how to correctly layout each TLS object in the per-task TLS area.

Another complicating factor is that Theseus loads and links all crates at runtime, which means that our implementation [must support both statically-linked TLS areas from the base kernel image as well as newcomers found in dynamically-loaded crates](https://github.com/theseus-os/Theseus/commit/fd1f11d99f1b4252abb35fffe7ae45f9f7ca616b).
There are a lot of tradeoffs herein as it relates to reserving and allocating offset ranges in the TLS space for TLS data sections, tracking TLS data sections per namespace, per crate, etc -- but these are best saved for a separate post about TLS.

We went a step further by implementing [Rust's `thread_local!()` macro](https://github.com/theseus-os/Theseus/commit/dd62aff423e1deceed503e3341827ba1e04dce79) for any Theseus crate, which offers lazy dynamic initialization and cleanup of TLS areas.
This overcomes the limitations of standard ELF TLS sections, which behave like `static` globals in Rust: they are `const`-initialized and never dropped.

### Porting the `object` crate to Theseus
The `object` crate is standalone and doesn't need to be ported to Theseus specifically, thus we can simply port it to `no_std` and place it in Theseus's `libs/` directory. 
The only real difficulty here is that while `object` *does* support `no_std`,  no previous users of `object` needed to *write* to an object file in a `no_std` environment. 
Thinking about it, we do agree that's kind of weird, but Theseus is just like that sometimes. 😊

Once we convinced the maintainers of `object` that this feature was necessary, the changes required to do so weren't very involved. 
It boiled down to a rearrangement of `object`'s Cargo features and configuration blocks: check out the [PR we submitted (that was accepted)](https://github.com/gimli-rs/object/pull/400) for more details.


## Miscellaneous Improvements
* We [improved the page allocator](https://github.com/theseus-os/Theseus/commit/05f1213a562639be74aa7ceaeef301a23e86e97a) to allow it to lazily merge contiguous freed chunks of pages. 
  * This happens lazily after an allocation request first fails; it is possible to also do it proactively in `AllocatedPages::drop()`, but that makes deallocation more expensive.
  * Needed for loading C object files or static libraries with entry points at a fixed address, e.g., the default entry point of `0x400000`.
  * Future work: support building and loading position-independent executables (PIE, and PIC). This is required to simultaneously load multiple C executables at the same fixed address, because Theseus only offers a single virtual address space.

